xxiv tutte lentum tinette.

Welsh Saints‚ comprising not only the lives of MS. Vespas. A. xiv (which
MS. was known to John of T.), viz. Gundleus, eadocus, Iltutus, Teliuns,
Dubricius, David, Bernacus, Paternus, Cletaucus, Keblus, Tatheus,

nat spoken in connenyent Englysl he or dewe ordre as it shulde be or it tt be ouer
shortlyetonehed ornat suttyeyently expressyd Ι wherby any maner of persone myght
be offended or taire occasion of exception Ι bl it wyll please' hym to tnke it lor bt
best Ι for so it is ment δι charytnbly to refourme it by ys Legende where nede
shalbe Ι takynge b⁰ pryncypall intent of this treatyse to be us a Kalendre Ι to shewe
b⁸ names oi 1²⁰ seyntes ol theyr countrey & where they Iye Ι as it shal do when it
tlttllttlt‘ttllll ltttttttlltlttttttttllllllltlt letti?
storyes shortlye towohed Ι 11² it maye be as a preparatyse or u begynnyirge to redarii
the people ol this Realme 120 ratberto hane the sayde blessyd seyntes in leue δι
honoure Ι ior there can no lhynge be ioued tr honoured but it be lrnowen. And
ior asmoehe ns it is but of lale tyme syth the sayde Legende wus gatheryd to-
gyther in snche maner as it is nowe Ι und that euery thynge in this treatyse is
shortly touched more lyke to a Kulendre then a legende Ι eousyderynge also
that the most parte os tho sayntes thet be in the sayd legende & in this kulender
were eyther borne in this Realme or were abydyuge thetin δι that theyse other
countreys lrelande Ι Scotlnnde and Wales Ι ot verny ryght owe to be subiecle lle
obedyent to this Realme os Englonde es it semyth this lytyll treatyce maye
conuenyentlye be callyd the Kalender ol the newe Legende ol Englonde.
¹ Moreouer next nster 1³³ sayde Kalendre loloweth the iyle of seynt Byrget shortlye
abrygged n holy and blessyd wydowe Ι which lyse is ryght expedyent for enery
maner os persone to lohe vpon meost in especinll for them that lyue in mnttyrnony
or in the estate of wydowhod hl they may se what grace and vertue was in this
blessyd woman which lyued in the snme degne as they do Ι und the rather to be
encouraged to desyre to haue lyke grace and vertne. In i¹⁰ latter ende of this beke
is a lytell drenght of Mayster Wa[l]ter Hylton ot the medied iyle shewynge howe
and by whome it shulde be used Ι dt though it haue ben Imprynted before this tyme
yet take it eharytahly Ι ior i²³ more a good thynge is linowen the better it is nnd
parcase by this occasyon it may come to the knowlege of some men that otherwyse
shnlde neuer haue harde speke ot it.

Explicit Prologus.

[Follows the Table nithe seyntes (with the same items as Nova leg, Angl,
and Edgar at the end).]

De sancto Adriano abbate δι consessore

Eynt adryan was abhot of the monastery ot niridinn Ι that is a lytle iro
man lttl¹{stetistitlttttltlttlsslllt lttltlellltllttlldtltt}
esense desyred bi saynt Theodremyghte be elected therto Ι & so he was upon this
condicion that he shulde accompany seynt Theodre into Engionde and he ussentyd
and so relnsynge the honoure he tolie the labente Ι And when he cume into
Englonde he had eommyttyd to hym the rule ol the monasterye oi seynt Augustyne
ol Cannterhnry and there he gadered a great multytudeot' dyscyples δι taught them
metyr astronomye arythmetrylre Ι tlt also dynynite Ι & many oi his dyscyples coulde
grelre llo laten tonge as well as theyr οινηεΙ dt he with seynt Theodre taught 1³⁰
tewnes of syngynge in 11⁰ chnrche of Englon which usore theyr tyme was onely
vsed in Kent Ι & he passed out of this worlde lull ol good werkes Ι Sc good
{affliges ibethv'nIiils of lannarytlgr the ygre ol ΙΙΠτΙΙοΙΙίε lllud1 stiilylil hundreds
Eniglonde wirich¹weri iryirliatsoerliaire biiiighbliilyby plyrniis‘irn ΙΙ) sie bsy {iiiii io
seynt Adryan were delyuered Ι he reysed a mun fro deth Ι & he appered toene
l& had hym shewe seynt Dunstane hi he dwellyd in honses bl were well dt
sufficiently couered Ι but b⁰ moder ol almyghty god &he Ι br other her semanntes
lny open lo ys heuyns wlrerlore anone seynt Dnnstane repayred the Chnrehe ol
our Lady Ι and vsed moohe to be there in centempiacyon Ι end on a nyght as he

 

