montanus itio nt et. ditinum. 533

Beatrix: whoe being with Childe by him, and loking out oi her windowe
towards the Nunnerye of our B. Ladics, betwixt the Feastes oi her
Assumption and Nativite‚ she sowe a snowe white Doue, flyeing from
thence to her, and with Closed wings entred into her right sleives : which
remayned with her seaven dayes tame, before she was delivered of hers
Childe. And this my Author reporteth from the verie mouth ol the
forementioned Beatrixe. The Childe borne, was Christned by the name
oi Theodore, which afterwardes shee, vpon Christe appearing vnto her,
channged with Christiana; being verie young and religionsly inclynetl‚
she vowed virginitie at St. Albans Relickes, and lived verteouslie,ro
impatient of immodest speaches.

This young gentlewoman Ranulph [Flamber ¹] Bishop of Durham
(a man which swayed all England vnder William Rufus) dishonestlie
affected (i), and sought by sundrie means to deptive her of her virginitie:
which she Constantiie withstode ; and once when the B. had her at such 15
avantage in a retyred noune, as she coulde scarslie avoyd him, shee had
no other reiudge but to intreat him, ii he would needs persever in that
purpose, to permitt her to barr the doore: which he, swearing her to
rotome, suffred; soe as shee made an escape, less scrupulous to breche
her insorced oathe then to lese her virginitie. The yll minded Bishop no
being thus crossd of his perverse purpose, practised to effect it by an
other means, in Causing one Beflred (a man depending on him) to Marrye
her; whoe prevailed soe farr with her Parentes and frindes (whom shee
dutst not contradict) as shee was betroathed vnto him, but woulde in noe
sort consent to marrye him, till her Fathers hard vsage oi her, in ²5
imploiing her in base offices (which she disdained not to effect), in a sort
iniorced her. Being Maried, when they were readie to goe into Beda,
shee humblye intreated him to lorbeare her, whoe had vowed her
virginitye vnto God; and ior feare ol his displeasure putt him in mynde
of that which passed betwixt St. Cicilia and St. Valerian: which moved 50
him soe much, as hee discisted and was satisfied as it were lor the
present. But his frindes pressed him soe, as hee gave not ouer to vrge
her osten, and that verie eamestlie, to periorme the part of a wile with
him: which shee still prevented (thoughe with great deficultie), wberevpon
her husbande Berffred prevailed soe sarr with her¹ as he perswaded ber 35
to goe with him to a house oi Cannons, where the Superiour Called the
rest of the Religious men ², whoe did perswade her in the presence ol her
husband and them all there to performe the Act of Matrimonie with him
whom shee had Married; sor that Matrymonie was good and instituted

matrem de domo suo prospectore monasterinm beate dci genitricis quod in
ciuitate situm erat: et ecce columbam unam nine candidiorem egressam de
monasterio uidit ud se recto itinere modesto uolatu uenire, et in dexteram manicam
tunice qna erat induta . . . tis alis sese totam in . . . Erat cutem tunc dies sabboti,
quadie precipue celebraturatidelibos memorio genitricis dei. Ernt ecinm inter
assumpcionis et natiuitatis dies ipsius. Porro columba cum pre(lntu) muliere,
sicut ipso michi retulit. septem continuos dies in ..... ine egit, utet attrectan-
....... bus eius incuitabiliter plond . . . . . . . nune in grcrniommc in sinn
ipsius requiescere gauderet ..... ¹on the margin. ² ouerl.

 

