nv ’ ¹ liure iegitur tonitr.

Of John oi Tynemouth's works, as enumerated by Boston‚ most are
lost. So his Commentary on the Pentateuch‚ Josnua mages, Kings‚ and
tlte Apocalypse‚ ‘ in maximo volumine,' which is commended ior its literal
no less than moral and allegorical interpretation of Scripture3 possibly
Capgrave, in his commentary on the same books, ransaeked this work
in the same way as he did his Sanetilogium. So his Lectionarium‚ with
short lives of all the Saints of the Church oi Salisbury for the lessons.
So the Appendices to Bede's. Martyrology. So also the ‘Liber servorum
Dei maior qui vocatur Martyrologium, io materno volumine’ (as eontra·
distinguished from the ‘Liber servorum Dei minor qui vocatur Sancti-
logium ex vitis et miraculis Sanctorum Angliae, Walliae‚ Scotiae et
Hiberniae collectum, in niagno volumine’) ¹. Oi this Martyrology-
which, as the nante and- size imply, must havecontained the lives ol all
the generally acknowledged Saints oi the whole Catholic Churclr ¹, and
not the English Saints alone—Tanner cites a MS. ‘in bibi S. Albani:
hut every trace of this is lost. Happily some of its pieees have been
preserved in MS. Bodl. 24⁰ (a Bury St. Edmunds collection), together
with others irom the Sanctilogium; the former being headed ‘Iohannes
in lllartilogio,' the others ‘ Ioh. in Sanctilogio.¹ I give a list of the two z·-

lohannes in Martilogio. Iohannes in Sanctilogio.

Cuthburga. Karileph (Nare).

Keyna. cogitante me (in Ninian).

Walburga. Alban.

Wliliilda. Maxentia.

Iustus. indractus.

“Herbertus puer. Lethardns.

Robertus ab> Yvo et Athanatus.

Ebba. Deusdedit.

Hildelitha. Fiaerius.

Kinebnrga et Kineswitha. Kened.

Erkengoda. Werburg.
Derithea quae et itta-
De rasura, tonsura et corona

monachorum.

Walleuus is simply headed Ioh. Anglicus. Now, in comparing the
texts given in Bodl. from the Martyrology with those of our Collection in

¹ Bale and Pits ialsely eonsider both troilis as the two parts oi a Sanetilogium
Angliae. Bale says: ‘Multis vir ille nominihus perpetuam gloriam, tunc hoe
praecipue facto meritus est, quod Gnidonem illum Dionysiaoum abbatem, Gallum,
qui de vitis Sanctorum magna volumina congessit, imitatus, grande volumen et
ipse de uitis et miraculis Sanctorum Angliae, Vvalliae, Scotiae, et Hiberniae feeit.
Quod opus Sanetiloginm vocabat, atque in duas partes divisit: quarum unum,
maiorem servorum Dei librum censuit nominandam, alteram vero minorem?
Pits: ‘Vitas res gestas, et miracula Sanctorum Angliae, Walliae, scotiae, et
Hiberniae ingenti volumine complexus est. Totum opus in diras partes distri-
butum Sanetilogium servorum Dei maius et minus nominavit! The Mart. included
English Saluto, as well as others, aad was no doubt uo independent collection.

 

