Tnnuuuttiutt. xxix

Bordeaux, July 16, 1265, and is honoured as a Saint in his Order; Simon
de hlontsort, ol whom ‘ bliracula, curn emtione ad illurn, no. 1265} are
given in MS. Vesp. A. vi (fifteenth cent.); Robert of Knaresborougb
(Engl. lite in verse ed. Roxb. Club, 1834); and Rich. Rolle os Hampolle
(c. 13oor 349 i), have no place in the collection.)

The Collection is as complete as· possible, and the amount oi materials
brought together by one man is truly astonishing. But it is always the
‘one man’ who does things, and the success will largely depend ou the
individual, or character, 3ηά on the encouragement or discouragement he
may find. The spirit (‘ trieb ¹) oi a time will produce questions, or tasks,
which evolve in the brain: but the auswer, and whether there be an
answer, will always lie with the individual. osten ‘lun in tenebris lucet, et
tenebrae eam non comprehendunt! He may be ousted by his peers—
and then there may be a Hegira, the upheaval oi lslam, or the posthumous
triumph oi the Son of Man. Or lte may turn his back upon his kind, aud
be silent, it' he think fit-it is his undoubted right to be silent, and no
lorce can compel him to speak it he refuses ; bis talents, his genius, are
from God, 3ηά his own, as well as his love, to dispend-or not to dispencl
—as he thinks fit. He is always the supreme judge in matters regarding
himself-under God—and no Kaiser or King will prevail against him in
this respect. He may have five talents, and trade with them and make
other five, or he may have two, 3ηά gain two, or he may have one, and
hide it in the earth. He may even serve in being silent, and be apassive
instrument in producing some end. The commundy, society, mass-the
human beast-is always slow and mediocre, and may not be ripe, or may
slumber—or may not deserve him. A resolute man will not long be
crying in the wildemess: the world is wide, and has many peoples, and
many occupatione, or quiet harbours‚ to rest in 3ηά be at peace.

In our case the question was answered, the task was done: our author
was 3 congenial man, amongst congenial men, audiound all the encourage-
ment and assistance he would require. His task was in the air, and
served tlte purpose or interest oi his class. He found the libraries open,
insonnation ready tor the asking, friendly compeers, and no jealousy-
from a mistaken sense oi same—whichoiten deleats the best intentioris.

His collection exhausts nearly all the materials then known to erist.
He might perhaps have added Caedmon, Bega (Vita in MS. Faust. B. iv,
ed. Tomlinson, 1842), Peter first abbat oi Canterbury (V. by Eadmer in
C.C.C.C. 371), Remigius first bp. oi Lincoln (V. in C.C.C.C. 425), Edburg
winton, Elphegus, Bimstan (all contained in MS. Lansd. 436), or the
additional lives in Bodl. 240 (see ll. 538), or some more ot' the nris-
sionarie53 but generally the Saints omitted are omitted because a life
did not exist, or, as in the case of many Irish Saints, was out of his
reach. His knowledge oi English hagiography is truly astonishing. lle
knows all the chief lives oi earlier and later hagiographers. lle knows
Adamnan's Lile os Columba (c. 695), Bede-who stands on the threshold
ot English hagiography, Alcuin's Vita Willebrordi, Willibald¹s V. Boni·
sacii, Wolstan's Life oi Ethelwold. But the systematic productiori oi lives

 

