ra mono teutona unalia.

ford', in Wales ², searching the libraries of the monasteries and cathedral-
churches. He traversed all England and Waies, but there is no evidence
that he went beyond. How did liemanage? He excerpted and compared
notes. ‘Apud Glastoniam de libris monasticis excerpsi: hesays once
(Patr. p. 289) 3 ‘ln quibusdam locis scriptum inveni,’ he says sometimes ²¹.
As the MSS. were too valuable to be borrowed he had to use them
on the spot, and as he did not want the whole lives he had to excerpt
them⁴¹ lf he meets with conflicting opinions he registers them both,
satisfied with being a ‘relator simplex’ of his informants. Sometimes
his labours were not crowned with success: a life of St. Kened, ‘in uno
solo loco Walliae,' had become illegible from age; the acts of S. Kynes-
burga had perished in the Danish period. .

ln thus travelling in the interests of science he followed in the steps of
Goscelinus‚ and set himself the example to subsequent antiquaries, as
Boston and Leland. ’

His way of treating his materials he himself defines thus: ‘Ego vero
in prescriptis et dubiis, et in sequentibus non nullis, auctoritatem dis·
cutiendi et diffiniendi mihi non presumo, sed tamquam relator simplex,
que in diuersis libris et locis sine laboribus et difficultate sedulus indagator
reperire potui, ardua peritis ventilanda relinquens sine invidia, com·
munico’ (Patr. p. 290). He oses no criticism, is not sceptical, takes every-
thing for granted that comes under his notice, even the most marvellous
or incredible, is of unlimited credulity, and delights especially in gruesome
tales—apparitions of the dead, visions, ‘ prodigia, portenta⁵,’ duc, ascribing
everything to ‘virtuti divinae, non humanae? He always gives as little
as possible of his own, makes no remarks, and simply lets his sources
speak. Even in the Historia aurea he is extremely sparing of words, and
rather gives documents, dre, than take the trouble of expressing himself ;
tbe bullr of this worlr consiste in extracts from Higden, &a He is not
aman of genius or of brilliant parts, but a compiler3 no historiam
in the modern sense, but an antiquary, a collector of facts, dates,
documents, dac.

The materials collected he might use in different works: indeed, the
same lives, stodes, dre, are found in the same, or almost the same words
in his Sanctilogium, Martyrologium, and Historia aurea-which isin the

1Ἡιολ Heres, p. 572: ‘hliracula vero que post obitum eins ad laudem et
honorem nominis sui peecatoribus ostendere dignatus est omnipotens deus, in
diuersis voluminibus in loco requietionis eius quasi infinito vidi. . . . Vidi etiam
in uno volumine in loco prefato de diversis miraculis et morborum generibusque
per S. Thomam patrata fuerant et ostensa, quadraginta viginti quinque! .

ῃΚεῃεά, p¹ 109: ‘Multa alia de confessore isto glorioso in uno solo loco
Wallie scripta vidi, que vetustate quesi deleta legi non poterant)

³ Cf. Alban z ‘Iudicia premissorum discutienda lectoribus peritis relinquens; que
diuersis in loeis exarata repperi, sine inuidia scribendo communicare decreut’

⁴ His excerpts were no doubt often hastily made; this explains the extreme
brevity often found ln his abnegemus, to the detriment of the construction, and
the mistalres‚ both in grammar and dates, that are not uncommon in his writlngs.

⁵ Herein he differs from Walter Hemingford, who rather records eclipses, earth-
quares, pestileuces, and other natural phenomeua.

 

