xw y wora tertona tacite.

Normannum et Rothomagi natum, anno Verbi incarnati 1499'). lt is
preceded by an alphabetical index of the Saints' names, with a short
characteristic (beginning ‘Adrianus abhas greca lingua peritus floruit.
aidanus qui et Aidus, abbas, virtutibus mirandis et miraculis effulsit.
Aidanus episcopus plagas Anglie borealis sub rege Oswaldo ad fidem
convertit‚' ac). This MS, like Otho, omits Ursule, but retains the
Tib-text or Richard; it omits, besides, Theliaus (though named in the
index) and Winwaloeus (which were retained in MS. Otho). No more
MSS. are known, though the expression ‘vulgariter intitulatum,' tte, in
the above note seems to indicate that the collection was rather a popular
work at that time. N one oi the MSS. preserved seems to be the original
MS, which must have belonged to the first hair ci the century, and
possibly contained Capgrave¹s name; it probably omitted Ursula.

The state of the Collectionas represented by these MSS. of the fifteenth
century, and popularly known by the title De Sanctis Angliaa forms the
intermediate stage between MS. Tib. and the edition of 1516. The
new alphabeticaliy arranged text, with its omissions ¹, was reproduced
iu the editiont but on the other side it still retains some of the original
coutents of MS. Tib. which have disappeared in the edition—so the
Tib-text of St. Richard-and stands nearer to it in the titles and readings,
while it has none of the additional lives of the edition. To whom
this new state is due we have no direct testimony. The Collection has
irom an early date been known as Capgrave’s (1393-1464), though no
one knows on what authority,' so-as he was neither the author of the
original collection (MS. Tib), nor can have any connexion with the
edition and its additions—he must, is he had a hand in the work, be
the author of this new revision, though the mere mechanica] transposi-
tion or the parts into alphabetical order—and that is nearly all the merit
he can claim—would hardly entitie him to the name of author, let alone
the sole author, of the Collection ².

3. At last the Collection‚ thus newly arranged and revised, was, with
further omissions and fifteen new lives, edited in 1516 by Wynkyn de
Worde. This edition has the following note at the end τ

‘Explicit Noua legenda Anglie ³. Impressa Londonias in domo Winandi
de Worde, commorantis ad signum solis in vico nuncupato the Flete
strete, Anno domini mcccccxw, xxvii. die Februarii.

Itaque omnes hystorie hic collecte merito dicuutur noue, quia licet

¹ Even the line omitted in Margaret in the Ed. (see p. 173, i. 40) is already
wanting in MS. l'anuer.

“Cavc‚ Hist. lit. ii. 285, rightly says: ‘De hac (Iohannis Tiumuthensis]
lucubratione nou racemos quosdam sed plenam, quod nirmt, vindemiam reportavit
Ich. Capgravius in ¹Catalogo ,Sanctorum Angliae, cuius operis non tarn auctor
(1ηέῠῶζέςξὲτξὲᾝέῗὲἓεῖξεῃιίῒῐὴε Prologue, p. 9: ‘Et quia maior pars Sanctorum
iu hac presenti legenda iam nouiter impressa contentorum fuerunt de ista patria “
que nune Angiia vocatur, aut cum vocabatur Britannia vel postquam nomen
Anglie sortita est in ea nuti vel conversatis et quia similiter predicte (l) terre
Hibemie, Scotie, et Wallie de iure subici debent et obedientes esse tenentur huic
regno Anglie, presens volumen istud, ut videtur, nou incongrue vocari potest
“NovategenuanngheP'

 

