annuntium. xxxva

sent by thern to the University, probably Oxford ¹, to acquire that higher
knowledge which the Priory could not give; and that, after eompleting
his course, hc received the orders of acolyte, subdeacon, deacon, aud
presbyter at Durham-which orders were conferred in consecutive years
-and‚ lastly, was appointed vicar of Tynemouth by the Prior and
Conveni, with the assent of the nubat of scalenus, and presented to

the hisho .

The pride of Tynemouth ivas its old and famous priory. It stood upon
a lofty roci< north of the mouth of the Tyne, which here divides the
counties of Northumherland and Durham, prospecting boldly into the sea
and partly encircled by its ivaves3 it was surrounded on the land side
with an escarpment in the manner of a fortress, the defences extending
around ‘Priore' Haven¹ to and upon the fortitied peninsula which forms
the southern side of the navent. Across the river stood the old monastery

¹ There were but four eolleges at Orford ut that time: University, Merton
(founded by Walter de hlerton. 1264), Balliol (f. by Balliol, K. of Seots, c. 1²60),
Exeter; yet the number of studente is stated at 30,oao[l]. The rise of Oxford was
due to the studious pursuits of the new orders, end the emulation among the old.
All men of auynote in the thirteenth century were either Dominicans or Frnucfscnns,
ns Roger Bacon, nl. Hales, Roh. Grosthead, Scotus. Their superior learning was
un incentive to the older orders to send their young men to the University and to
eudow new colleges, the continual round of duties in the monasteries allowing no
vacant hours for private study. So Merton and Balliol were founded, with a view
to traiu young men for the offices in the abbeys, and to give them that tiuctnre of
scieuce which the friars were found to possess. ln the reign of the Edwards, the
same spirit continued, and new foundatlous were ndded, uot only by the monasteries
but by other patrous, bishops, &c.; so that at the death of Edwurd 111, in 1377,
there were seven colleges built ut oliford, six nt Cambridge. ‘These seminaries
were soon everstocked‚ und the monasteries could not employ all that were tit;
then the rest were transplanted iuto the country ehurches, and became the regular
clergy and the new eudowed vicars' (Newcome, p. m)- Iu Edwnrd Il's time,
the Benedictines of Durhnm built Dnrham College for their young uren; those of
Gloueester built Gloueester College. which was afterwards enlarged, by lieence of
mortmaiu, for other houses of the Benedictines ; und Archbp. lslip founded Canter-
bury College to educate young uren lor the supply of the nbbey and cathedrnl of
Cauterbury, culled Christ Chureh. lt wns the eustonr of St. Albaus to send their
novices to Gloueester Hall (now Worcester College). ¹

² ‘The situation of the buildings may be guthered, in some degree, from n plan
of Tynemonth mnde iu the time of Queeu Elizubeth. The original existe iu the
Cotton Collection (Aug. I. ii, art. vi, vii). From this plan we leern that the
monastery, church, and couventunl buildings, together with the ward-house, were
surronuded on tlre land sides with an escarprnent in the manner of a fornes„ aud
thnt on eutering from the village, over n wide moat and drnwbridge‚ tlte first
burldrng iras the gnte-house of the monastery, in which the porter resideo, having
for its neighbour the ward-house, where nrmed defenders of the convent were
lodged. To the right of this uvas the “outer ort,¹' beyond which the defeuces
extended urouud “Prior's haveu’ to aud upon tint fortified peninsula which forms
the southern side of the haren. Eutering within the gatehouse aud trull, was the
great court, on the south side of which stood the priucipal domestic offiees of
the convent, within an enclosure or inuer court. On the south side of the parish
chureh or ongrnnl edifice, and adjoiuing that part of the wall which isnow
standrug, was theucommon-hull, which formed the westenr side of the cloister.
On the southern side were the bnttery-hall and lcitchen, and the new hall. The
Chapter-house and the dormitory formed the eastern side of the inelosure called
the Clorster, aud on the south of the dormitory was the ¹¹ Lords' Lodging,” which

 

