Jiiiitflflilfiissii. xv

St. Erkenwald is written by another, less correct, hand; but in the
midst of this text one column (fol. 117 ba) is written by the old hand,
containing different matter, viz. a narration of Piers Tollere. ln Ebba
a passage is added at the end by another hand on the space left vacant
by the former scribe. ln ngin the narration at the end has been
purposely effaced.

The Collectiou contains about 177 Narrationes. Some of these treat
of English Saints not contained in the lives: so St. Erlrengoda's life is
given in the Narratio to Sexburga, Alcuin's in Aldhelm, Herebertus puer
in Weneheta, Walleuus comes in Lanfranc; Hedda, conred, and Olla
in wilfrid, Sigihert in Furseus, Sebba in Hildelitha, Cedwalla in John
of Beverle .

a. ln sorire MSS. of the fifteenth century we have the same collection
in a different order: the lives are now arranged alphabeticnlly, not in
the order of the Calendar, and Patrick¹s Purgatory aud Tundal as wellas
many Narrationes, and the marginal additions of la S. Tib-the antiphones
and collects, and the genealogies in lilargareta and Oswin-are omitted.
Resides, theN arrationes of Paulus Leonensis and Alcuin, whichin MS. Tib.
occur in Laurentius and Aldelm, are now given with ithamar, and certain
passages in Ebba (p. 307), Egbert (p. 367), Edwin (p. 361), hlalachias
(p. 1611), eric (p. 512] are left out. But otherwise the texts are literally
the same as in Tib, though more corrupted, and even the titles remain
the same. Eiron—although the order of Cedda and Cedd is now
reversed—the words ‘lic post vitam s. Cedde¹ in the above quotation are
retained unchanged in Cedd, which is rather cutinus. These uss. are :
Otho D ix, York Cath. Libr. xvi. C 1, and Tanner 15. lllS.York (where
the collection follows after the ‘ Legendae Sanctorum collectae per Fratrem
Petrum Calo Ord. Praed’) Ihave not been able to consult. MS. Otho, wr.
before 1450, was nearly effaced by fire3 the list of contents in Smith, Cata-
logue of Cott. MSS. 0111, 1696 (who describes the MS. as ‘Vitae Sanctorum
Angliae collectae a Iohanne Capgravio’), omits several lives, viz. Carantoc,
Edward mart.,Ethelbe1t‚ Odulph, Paulinus, Tatheus, Ursulo: but these
were entant except the last two¹. llS.Tanner15,4to, vellum, well executed,
in double columns, was—according to a note in the MS.—written in 1499
for the church of Canterbury at the expense of Tho. Goleston, prior of
that church and professor, by Jacob Neill,a Normun from Rouen; the
collection is titled ‘ De Sanctis Argiuom-(the note runs thus: ‘Perfectum
est hoc opus, vulgariter intitulatum De Sanctis Angliae, ad laudem et
honorem omnipotentis Dei ac Sce. Cantuar. ecclesiae, ex impensis
Reverendi in Christo patris Domini Thomae Goleston‚ eiusdem ecclesiae
prioris ac sacrarum literarum professoris egregii, per me Iacobum Neill

¹ The MS. is now practieully useless, as only occasionally a word is readable.
11 was written ut the end of the first half os the fifteenth century. It had the Tib.-
' text of St. Richard. 1 had no truce of Tutheus ; Ursulo is wanting.

² The Collection, fol. 1-581, is followed, in uuotlrer hand, by De primo statu
Landuvensis ecclesiae, excerpta de pervetusto libro de Vitis Sanctorum Britanniae¹
f. 582. De filia Guordle quum S. Dubricins Deo consecravit, f. 589. Vita
5. Dubrieii archiep. Urbis Legionum, f. 590. Vita S. Bernacffi, f. 595, ending
rnoomplete on f. 596.

 

