- 536 onomata 1. ,

sights and dreames, as he gave over to solicitt her ¹, thoughe she² was
long after nowbled with the Temptation of the flesh. After this, she
having Choyce of sundrie places, preferred Sainct Albons where she had
vowed virginitie‚ and where her deare frind Roger lave buried: and
5 Alexander Bishop of Lineolne vailing her, she lived vnder the obedience
of the Abbott ot St. Albons (whoe then was Robert) as Roger before had
done; Contynuing still, as I take it, in his Ermitage‚ where persevering in
vertue, the Abbot greatly esteamed her, and was much advised by her,
and namelie when he was sent Ambassador from King stephen to the
10 Pope3 she searning not to approve the Kinges Title. This Christina
grewe at last to that perfectiori, as the farne of her vertues was divulged,
not onelye at home, but abroad‚ being noted for Cures. And namely in
healing one (of Canterburie of good parentage) of the falling evill, al gutta
Caduca saith my Author, whoe by that infirmitie grewe loathsom to her
15 Parentes, whoe before loved her dearlie; she being visitted of that
intinnitie for the space ofjtwelue yeres everieTewsdaye at 3 of theClock:
whoe was willed by Saint Margrett to goe vnto this Christiana, and to
drinlr water of her Blessing. Christina vnderstanding her suite, Causing
Alcuine a Preiste to Celibrate about three of the Clock in the morning,
ιο prayeing for her, and doing as shee had requested, enred her3 but would
in noe sort assume it to herself, but to God. Curing others, it pleased
God to visitt her with a Palsey, whereof being daungerouslie sick, shee was
the 7th daie Miraculouslye Cured with her prayers. Shee hathe also
prevailed for others when shee had bene denied herself, God being
²5 pleased to excercise her patience. Shee had a brother called Gregorie,
a Manchane Preist of St. Albons, whoe Comingone daye, and Celebrating
before her and there Sister Margret‚ dyed happilye as sone as hee had
received his Viaticum.

Shee was visited and comforted by an Angell in the form of a Pilgrime‚

30 whoe showed her a Glorious Crowne,· such as before wee noted our
Sauiour had done. And alsoe with another in the forme of a Bird,
which would light in her bosome, foreshewing her as it were things. For
shee had the giuft of seing others thoughtes Shee hathe appeared in the
night to Abbott Robert, and (having the giuft of seing others thoughtes)

35 advised him for his good, knowing of it, and manifested it to him, before
he imparted it to her 3 shee being never out of her Cell.

Shee likewise hath related what passed betwixt a Sister of hers and
her husband in Bedd at Huntington, shee being as farr of as Dunstable.
She bathe tolde her Mayde Doet of som vnfitt thoughtes which

40 possessed her, as shee with bashfulnes hath aoknowledged. And soe
Concluding abruptlye with noting howe shee tolde her Abbot of som
thoughtes that he had Contrarie to that which she had advised him, and
ending thus, makes mee to doubt what to think, whether theyre bee anie
perfitt Coppie, or whither the writer dyed before he perfitted it; or

45 whither shee removed to anie other place, where the writer had noe

¹ everlined, ² r. hel ³ MS. ad.

 

