nu runnu leucate unctu.

(Riiey, Joh. Amundesham, ii. 296), nor amongst the dead buried in the
cemetery‚ in MS. Harl. 3775 (Riley, ib. i. 431), nor in the Liber de
benefactoribus in MS. C. C. C. C.7 (Riley, Joh. de Trokelowe, p. 427).
Nor does Boston mention a change of place. So that there is no evidence
for connecting him with the abbey.

But, then, it must be considered that the historiographers were quiet,
unassuming men, simply ‘monachi S. Albani,’ and not made much of
during their lifetime‚ or rechoned among the eminent men—it was the ⁹
Renaissance that first taught men the sense of fame. His name might
easily be overlooked at a time when the abbey played a great rele in
politics, and was no longer the quiet place oi former times. The lists also
omit John de Trokelowe‚ Thomas Walsingham, &c

It must further be considered that the chief MSS. still extant of his
werks were wn'tten at St. Albans-so MS. Tib. E. i and the C. C. C. C.
MS. of his Historia aurea.

But a more potent reason, and one which decides the point, rvill appear
presently.

St. Albans was the most famous monastery of the time. It stood on
the south side of the present town (at the back of High Street), which
covers the summit and the northern declivity of a hill. It was slrirted by
the rivuletVer (a tributary of the Colne), across which stood Verulamium, ,
on the line of the Watling Street, an important Roman station, which is
perhaps identical with the fortress of Cassivelaunum destroyed by Caesar
in 54, and was taken by Boadicea in 61 Α. D. In honour of the protomartyr
Alban, said to have been beheaded here about 304 for sheltering=
the Christian priest Amphibalus, K. Offa founded a Benedictine abbey
in 793, which, with the church, was rebuilt (with liat Roman tiles from
Verulam) after 1077, by abbat Paul of Caen, a kinsman—if not son
—of Lanfranc, and dedicated by the next abbat, Richard d’Albiney,
in 1115, in the presence of Henry I. The said Paul recovered the
possessione of the abbey, which had been seized by K. WIIlianr, and
added, besides Redbum, the cells of Wallingford‚ Tynemouth‚ Belver,

annorum distinctiones digessit Chronica sua usque ad tempora regis Heanei
a Conquaestn Secundi. Expost hluthaeus Parisiensis claruit, qui Rogeri praedicti
Chronicas necessarie ampliavit, et Vitas SS. Albani, nmpnibali, Thomae et
Edmundi archiep. Cant, conseripsit et depinxit elegantissime, et multos libros
providit eeclesiae. Cuius landes si omnino vellem perstringere, opus attentarem iu-
terminabile. . . Post Mathaeum, Willelmns llisangre, Henricus Blankfrount,Sy1non
Bynham, et Rieardus Savage. chronica successive scripserunt . . . lladulphus de
Dunstaplia non impar Maroni floruit, qui scripsit metrice vitas SS. Albani et
Amphibali, modernis et futuris merito commendandus . . . Impossibile est omnino
recitare singulos qui hic sanctitate, scientia, et probitate fulserunt¹ . . . (On fol. 532b
half a column is left vacant3 tol. 355 is writtennt a somewhat luter dare.) ‘Nostris
vero diebus . . . Nic. Radclef scripsit libros contra opiniones Iohannis Wyclef
heretici, et Willelmus de Bynham saepius eontra dictas opiniones, ipso vivente,
determinavit egregie: at Simon de Soutlrerei multos per suns praedicationes ab
errore praedicti Iohannis revocavit; omnes quidem huius loci monachi, omnes
simul et semel sacrae paginae Professores, At Simon in arte versificandi prae-
cipuus, in astrologia peritissimus, in poetria doctissimus, inter cunctos regincolus
nostris temporibus habebatur)

 

