’ ιιιιιιιιιιιιιιι. Ιιιι

Hertf f,ord Bynham, Hattield; his successor, Wymundham and Sopwell
nunnery3 abbat Geoti‘reyfounded StJlranshospualfor lepers From
Pope Adrian IV (born at Bedmond, three miles SW. from st. Albans)
theabbey tn 1154 obtained precedence over all other abbeys of Engbnd,
and Honoriusj ιιι 1218, exempted the abbat from the jurisdiction of the
Bishop o fLincoln, his diocesun. The once magnificent, mitred, parlia-
nrcntary abbey has since disappeared, but the church still stands, and
attests the grandem of the whole, and the perfection of ecclesiastical
architecture in England.

The abbey had a grammar school which conferred the degree of
Baccalaureus as well as the universities (rules m Riley, Regii 305).

It was the seat of English historiography. lt had afamousScriptorium,
in which scribes, sometimes as many as twelve, or even twenty, were
constantly engaged, under the direction of an armarius, in copying and·
multiplying books. Here missals and service books were transcribed,
lives of saints copied, passing events registered. lt had been established
by the first Norman abbat, Paul, with tlre help of Lanfruna and each of
the following abbats had contributed to the library. Their exertious in
collecting and copying books led to the compilation of the historicannals
for which St. Albans became famous. These annals began under the
administration of Simon (1163-83), on the establishment of the office of
historiographer of st. Albans. The first was Walter, who—after 1180-
wrote Anglicarum rerum cronica (Pits)². Next followed Roger de
lVendover, who took up the work left unfinished by Walter, and continued
it down to his own time (c 1230-5) in his Flores Historiarum, adopting
Walter’s work as the basis of his own. His work again became the text·
book for a school of writers. On Roger's death, hlatthew Pan'ssuccceded
as historiographer (1236·53)· He remedelled Roger¹s work, curtassing
the earlier portion, and continued it to 1253, in his Historia maior ². At
the same time he wrote Vita S. Albani, Vitae duorum Offarum (the
founders of his abbey), Vitae ²3 Abbatum S. Albani, also lives of
Wulstan, Guthlac, Thomas Beket, Eclmund archip„ Stephon Langton,
and made an excerpt of his Chronicle for the monks of Tynemouth,
extending from 1066 to 1245 (now MS. Vitell. A. xx); and, between 1250
and 1253, he wrote the Historia Anglorum or Historia minor (ed.
Madden), and a Liber de anulis et gemmis et palliis quae sunt de
thesauro huius ecclesiae. Thongh a man of note in his day, and familiar
with the king and the nobility, he was never more than simply ‘monachus
S. Albani.¹ Hedied in 1259 (cf. Hardy‚Descript. catalogue, iii). Whether
he also wrote the first continuation of the Hist. maior, from 1²⁵³ to 1239
(MS-Reg 14C. vii f. r 57) isduubtful Furrherconnnuazionsstartnomrz59.

ιιιι that time, William of Maimesbury, Tlorence of lVorcester, tineo of

thegiiriidrkssimeon ornithonem Geoffreyryof hlonmouth had already published

²His history has again been adopted, und continued to 1326, by Matthaeus

lVestmonaslericnsis' ιιι his Flores Historiarum-a rather mysterions authen cf.
Hardy, Descr. Cat* rii.

 

