norrrrrowr nitu ot et. dhrirtine. 535

flight; being ascisted by one Edwine an Erimite, whoe procured her

a hores, and a boye to Convaye her, to one Alfwina an Anchorisse of
Flamsteed, where shortlie after the boye dyeing (called Lorick) appeared
vnto her; from thence she went to one Roger a holie Ermitt, whoe lived

in a desert not sarr from Dunstable where he was conducted devinelie, as 5
yow maie reed in his life in this my Collection here ¹. She lived in great
Austeritie with fasting and prayer, sitting 40‘ yeres vppon a bare stone.
But before she came thither, Edwine, by Rogers means, whoe refused to
admitt her, imparted her case to Radulphe Archb. of Canterburie, and
howe her parentes indeavoured to iuforce her : whoe answered, be Could 10
not iudge that Act less then murder. After this Burfred her husband,
together with the Preist whoe had maried them, came with others to the
Ermitage of the forenamed Roger, aud there in the presence of live
Ermittes gave her leave, notwithstanding that which had passed, to
dispose of her seli as she pleased3 and Thurstane Archb. of Yorke15
disolving the Match with there Consent, permitted him to Itlarrie, and

. shee to enter into Religion. When she had lived som fowre yeares,
Roger dyed, and it was revealed vnto her that she should succeed him in
that Ermitage. Thurstane hearing of Rogers death sent for christina,
vsed her verie lrindelie, osfred to provide for her, ether in England or els 20
where, if she would enter into Religion, and Commended her in the
meane while vnto the custodie and care of a Preiste‚ whose name my
Author Conceales; for that he was a Man of note and Creadit in the
worlde. This Preiste vsed her not well, secking what means he Could to
abuse and deflowre her, whoe bad noe refudge but prayer, in which she ²5
prevailed soe farr, as he was soe tenilied in the night with straunge

¹ Ol this Roger the Eremite Rosearroc writes: Math. Paris 1157 writeth that
King lienry the gd coming to St Albona the 41 yeer of his migne did in gining
giftes vnto the Church ther oue the 3 of hinrch, amongst other Jewells which he
bestowed in that Church on the Anlter of St. Albon end St. Amphibalus, did allso
giue certene Clothes and palles to be imployed to cover the bodyes of the Ermites
linger nnd Sigcr, and withall gnue moeny to buy a shrine or thing to carry them
in; by which 1 gether they were esteemed saintes. though Math. Paris humeth not
them soe ς and therfore though I dnrenot presnme to give them that title,yet 1 hope
I may giue occasion by naming thern to minister matter to others to enqnire more
ol them. Read Math, Paris, a 1257, fol. 1262, as lt was printed in Loudcn, 1571.

1 finde in the manuscript intitled Sanetiloginm Britannice, called by other
Johunnes Anglicus, thet he had bene nt Jerusalem, and was guided by 3 Angetts
tlt white with lightee from Wiushore to his Ermituge: wher being a munke he
lrued ln obedience to the Abbot of St. Albones3 end that he was of great note fer
venue, and liued about the yeer 1120, as may he seene in the end of the fore-
meutioned boolte in the imperfect lise oi st. Christina.

taddeo latert) 1 find in the Register of the Chureh of St. Alban this epitaph
wntten ου him and Sigare:

Vir domini verus, iacet hic Eremita Rogems;
Ac sub eo clarus, iacet hic Eremite sigone
Roger God‘s servant here doth ly, who Ermite true himself did try;
And ruder him likewise doth rest Sigar the worthy Ermite blest.
(Added on the margin crosswisexl The same manuscript noteth that there was

a table hanginge over their tomb iu which their miraculous lif is written: (added)
andin the life of Abb. Jefl'erie who lined then.

 

