aaaonuttioa. xxi

some oi the new lives, as Benedici, Bertellin, Crurgar, Wiro, Ursule, are inserted
in a wrong place.

considering the heavy style oi the Prologus with its cumbrous, mean·
dering periods, the grave mistakes, the superficialities in the new parts,
I should say that the last reviser can hardly be called a prolouad scholar
or able writer, and must be sought ia the humbler sphere oi the clergy ¹.
He boldly presents the volume as his own work, speaks of himself as
‘collector sive ut ita dicam auctor huius operis‚¹ who ‘suam compilandis
Sanctorum vitis dedit operam’ (Prol. p. 9) ², and arrogaatly ignores the
existence of a previous work, merely intimating vaguely that ‘quedam ex
istis (historiis) etiam reperiuntur apnclplures (i), uon tamen ita ernen-
date et correcte sicut in hoc volumen!

ln the same year with W. de Worde’s edition an English epitome ot “
the work was printed by Pynsou under the title ‘The Kalendre of the
newe Legende ol Englande’ lt is followed by a life oi St. Bridget
‘shortly abridged,¹ and, in some copies, by Walter Hilton's treatise on
mixed lise. It contains, in the same order, all the items oi the Latin
edition, with all the additional lives, and St. Edgar at the end, but ali

epitomized—hence the name Kalendre. To it is prefixedanew Prologue¹ ·

which states that the book was ‘taken out the newe Legende oi the
sayntys of Englande, lrelande, Scotlande, aad Wales for thoym that
vnderstande nat the Laten tonge,’ and refers the reader ior more informa·
tion to the ‘hole Legende ' wh'ich was ‘but of late tyme gatheryd togither
in suche maner as it is now'; expressing ‘the pryncypall intent oi this
treatyse to be as a Kalendre, to shewe the names ol the seyntes, of theyr
countrey, ἃ where they lye, to shewe also some lytell thynge of theyr
vertues δι myrocles, with some parte ol theyr storyes shortlye towched‚'
everything being ‘shortly touched more lyke to a Kalendre theu a
Legende.’ The book is still extant in some copies ³.

¹ That he was a rather narroweninded aran appears t'rom the Prologue, p. 8,
where he andrenes tlte power oi English Saints as against foreign Saints, thus:
‘Sed quorsum hec omnia? Nimirum nt nulla curiosa indagine forenses queriternns
longinquasve Sanctorum operationes, enm intra nos ipsos (he means in England)
sit regnum Dei, et tantos hio habeamus sanctos patronos, ut eornm merita nobis
sufficerent ad imitandum exempla, si nulla prorsus alia documenta haberemus:
immo tanto diligentiori studio eos imitari debemus, quo eis vicinius sumne annexi)
His patriotism appears also in this that, whereas John ol Tyaemonth had titled his
collection ‘Sanctilogium Angliac, ltaliae, Scotiae et hiberniae: ae in his title
only retains Angliae—‘ quia predicte terre Hibernie‚Scotie‚ et Wallie de iare subici
debent et obedientes esse tenentur huic regno Anglie’ (so Proh). He bitterly
deelaims against the prelates ot' his time.

Ι He would, however, hardly have dared to use these terms ii he had not at
least introduced the new lives.

³ As a specimen, l give the Prologue aad the tirel lise.

Here begynneth the Kalendre oi the newe Legende ol Englande.

Trrn Pronoea

THe iirste treatyee oi this present boire is taken out oi the newe legende oi
the sayntys oi Englande Ι lrelande Ι Seotlande Ι and Wales t'or theym that
vaderstande not the Lutea tange Ι that they atte theyr pleasme may be oceupyed
therwith Ι and be therby γ) more apte to lerne the resydue when they shall hero

 

