innotuerim ra

Chronicles of England (Bede, William of Malmesbury, lllatthew Paris,
dcc), adding other information from more recent sources and giving as far
'as possible the history of each Saint from all the materials known and
accessible in his time; always abridging, but always a faithful recorder
(ζ relator simplex ¹) of his sources, and adding at most the dates and anni·

versaries ;—to these lives he then generally appended, after the fashion of
his time, one or more Narrationes--legends¹ sayings, anecdotes, δια-111
. the wise of Vincentius Bellovacensis, which, however, have hardly any
connexion with the subject; and added, lastly, at the bottom of the
texts, the Antiphanes and Collects used in the festivals of the Saints.
The whole he arranged in the order of the Calendar, beginning with
Edwardus Rex et Confessor (January 5), and gave it the title: ‘Sancti-
logium Angliae‚ Walliae, Scotiae, et Hiberniae.¹

Of this collection, MS. Tiberius E 1 is the only MS. known to exist,
and is therefore of primaryimportance‚ though partly destroyed by the fire
of 1731. This MS, fol, vellum, beautifully written and executed in large
type, in double columns, was written near the middle of the fourteenth
century. Since the fire, it has been carelully re-bound, in tvo volumes.
Bishop Nicholson in his English Historical Library, 1736, p. 98, has
preserved an inscription at the end of the MS. (now destroyed by the
fixe), which throws light on the history of the MS.; it is this:

‘Hunc librum dedit Dominus Thomas de la Mare abbas monasterii
S. Albani Anglorum protomartyris, Deo et ecclesiae B. Amphibali de
Redbum, ut fratres ibidem in cursu existentes per eius lecturam poterint
celestibus instrui, et per Sanctorum exempla virtutibus insigniri ¹.'

Thomas de la Mare was Abbat of St. Albans 1349-96, after being
Prior of Tynemouthr341-49. Redbum wasacell oi St. Albans,cledicated
to St. Amphibalus (whose bones were discovered here in1178); situate
4} miles north-west from the abbey. lt served as a place of recess for
sick monks to receive the benefit of ease and fresh air. nubat Richard
Wallingford (1326-35) ordained that three monks should always be here
nn drery for one month, and then be relieved by three others—which
number was increased to four by Abbat John Whethamstede (Newcome,
Hist. of St. Albans, 1793, pp. 218, 339). (These monks ‘ on duty' are the
‘fratres ibidem in ncrsrc existentes ’ of the above inscription.) During the
great plague of1349,.when St. Albans 11115 suffering from want of pro·
visions‚ Thdmas de la Mare, to relieve the distress, sent sixteen monks
to duell at Redbum, with books and other necessaries, and built a new
dorniitory there, and another house, one part of which he reserred for
himself to study in, whenever he should choose to make his stay at this
place (Neucome, p. 247) ². He himself liked to reside there, and seems
to have held the place in special favour. On what occasion the grant of
the ll S. was made, we have no means of ascertaining.

uls. Tib, then, before being handed over to Redbum, was a MS. ol

¹ From this note is derived Roscarrock's account of MS. Tib, sce rlppeud'ur 1.

¹C'frnDugdale, Mon. Angl. iv. 525. Tnuner mentions n MS„ Tib. E xi,
contarnrng ‘Ordinatiouem tangentem socios commorantes apud Redbum factam,
nn. 136 ¹: but the volume containing it was lost in the fixe of 1731·

bz

 

