a) ι Mota turmot antlia.

andcoroner. lt had generally from fifteen to twenty monks. It had
a scriptorium or Libram, sorne of whose books are still extant ¹. Nor
was it without its share in literary pursuits. One of the monks wrote the
Vita S. Oswini (MS. C.C.C.C. 134) about 1110 (cf. Hardy, Descr. Cat).
A Tynemouth Chartulary (or rather portions of a Chartulary collected into
a volume) is now in the possession of the Duke of Northumberland
(Gibson). John de Trokelowe was cellarer at Tynemouth before he was,
with the then prior, for conspiracy removed in chains to St. Albans,
where he afterwards remained and wrote Annales'Edwardi ll (ed. Riley).

As a cell of St. Albans it kept up a constant intercourse with the
parent monastery. Monks of the ahbey became priors of Tynemouth,
and priors of T. became abbats of St. Albans-as Thomas de la Mare
(who was prior 1341-9, abbat 1349-96), and afterwards the famous
John Whethamstede (prior 1396-1420, abbat 1420-40, and again 1451-64).
Offending monks of either place were relegated to the other.

lt was a lively place, in a lively time, and played a prominent part in
the history of those days, being—on account of its fortified position-the
frequent resort of the kings on their expeditioris against the Scots. lt
had plenty of trouble as well as of glory. Here are some of the incidents
thet happened during our author's time, and of many of which he was
eye-witness. An eventful period was the reign of Edward 1². During
a considerable part of this reign the rnonks were involved in a dispare
with the burgesses of Newcastle, regarding the trade at the prior¹s town
of North Shields to the detriment of the king¹s lieges in Newcastle3 in
1292 judgement was given for the king and the burgesses. About the
same time the judicial privileges of the prior were attached, and the
king's juclges claimed to have cognizance of all pleas arising within
the liberty of Tynemouth3 for nearly eight years the prior had to submit
to this deprivation of his rights. Moreover, the king sought to obtain
the advowson of the priory, and to grant licence for election of priors;
attacked the right of sanctuaryand of amercirnents of both the priory
and the abbey. The priory also suffered heavily under the exactions
made for a crusadc, and, later on, for the recovery of Guienne. In 1295
Adam de Tewing was prior: he was accused of disobedience rothe
abbat, whereupon Abbat John de Berkhamstede hastened to Newcastle,
entered the priory by night and selred the prior, who, with John de
Trokelowe and other rnonks, was sent fn fetters to St. Albans; they
were said to have conspired to transfer the advowson to the king.
Adam was succeeded by Simon (de Waldentl. But despite his
wranglings with the priory, the king was a frequent visitor there: he

¹ So MS. Vitellius Α, xx (which prior Ralph de Dnnhatn gave to the priory);
MS. Durham Cath. Α. iv. b, thirteenth century (which was given to the church of
St. Oswin by brother Heury de Gorham); MS. C.C.C. Orrl. 134. with the Vita
S. Oswini; MS. C.C.C. Ο. 144 (written at T. irr the fourteeuth centnry); but the
oldest relic was a Psalter, known as Liber Oswini regis, MS. Galba A. v (now
nearly destroyed by tire). MS. rause. B. ix, containing part of the St. Albans
Cffssicffissffiffigss) is the Ms. found by Leland at Tynemouth.

. 1 son.

 

