sslssiissflutiissil. xxxix

His body was revealed and discovered in 1065, and, on the completior
ol the new buildings commenced by Mowbray, solemnly translated and
enshrined in 1110 (on which occasion also his Vita was written by a monk
ol St. Albans, then resident at Tynemouth). There were also interred
the bodies os Maleolm Cenmar, King ot Scotland, and his son Edward,
who were slaln by Mowbray’s forces in besieging Alnwick Castle in 1093
(the bodies were alleged to have been discovered in 1257); also Cospatric‚
Earl ol Dunbar.

The Norman choreb, built by Mowbray, was renovated in s more
magnificent style in 1220 (at which time Salisbury Cathedral and Hexham
abbey churcb were also commenced): a choir was added, anda western
extension equal to about one-third ol the whole length 3 the new parts, so
incorporated with the N orman churcb, being built in the beautiful Early
English style with lancet windows‚gracelully clustered columnarum soliated
capitals. From this time the church ivas conventual and parish churcb at
the same time, being halved so that the choir with its stalis was reserved
to the monks, the nave to the parish or vill 3 a screen separated the two.
¹ Α dispute, which had arisen between the Abbat ol St. Albans and the
Bishop oi Durham, touching the right of episcopal visitation and juris·
diction in the parocbial churches appropriate to Tynemouth-the priors
having refused obedience to the bishop by virtue os the immunity enjoyed
by the parent-abbey, which was immediately subject to the Holy See-
was, in 1247, finally settled by the sentence of delegates appointed hythe
Pope, iu this way, that the bishops were to exercise the office os visitor in
the parochial part ol the church only (‘ visitationis officium exercebunt
in illa parte ecclesiae in qua parochianis divina celebrantur, sine onere
procurationis, ita quod de monachis, seu alia parte ecclesiae, sive ecclesia
de cella, se nullatenus intromittant ’), and the priora, when appointed by
the abbat, were to be presented and promise canonical obedience to the
bisbop ‘ratione ecclesiarum parochialium Vicarii autem in ecclesia de
Tynemuth successive instituendi a priore et conventu de Tynemuth,
de assensu abbatis eorum, praenominato episcopo et successoribus suis
praesentabuntur; qui quidem admissi eidem episcopo in spiritualibus, et
mogachis memoratis de temporalibus respondeant’ (Hardy, Reg. Dun. i.
l)v 3 ·

The town of Tynemouth owed its rise to the priory, and had sprung up
as early as the reign of Edward Ι. It was a village inhabited by tenants
in husbandry‚ by workers in various handicralt trades, and by humble
ullagers, clustering under the defence ol the prior’s casae, and obtaining
a livelihood in dependence upon the great ecclesiastical fraternity, who
were its lords. ‘The Prior was to the dwellers in his demesne not only
an ecclesiastical father, a leuda] superior, and dispenser ot justice, but
was the head of an establishment which gave employment to the people,
and maintained a considerable body ol iunctionaries‚ servingmen, and
dependents’ (Gibson, Guide to T.).

The priory was rich, and had great territorial possessions; the prior
had Jurisdiction within the liberty, and appointed his own mere-reete

 

