huetbertus. xxxi

Ι archbp, Laniranc), Brompton (sor Augustin, Edward Confi, Dunstan,
Lansranc),VincentiusBellovacensis(forBoniiace,Dunstan),Legendaaurea
(sor Bede, Tho. Beket). In Alban the lit‘e is filled up lrom Bede, Matth.
Paris, Hist. Eliensis, and some additions ‘que in diversis locis exarata
repperi! Augustin is made up from Bede, Goscelin, Brompton; Bede
from Bede's works, Will. of Malmesbury, Simeon of Durham, Leg.
aurea3 Dunstan from the two lives by Osbern and Eadmer, irom Vinc.
Bell., Higden, Brompton‚ Will. Malm. De Antiq. Glaston.; in Cuthbert,
Bede's lile is preceded by the libellus de ortu, and followed by extracts
from the Hist. translationum, Simeon Dunelm., Reginald's lib. de admi·
randis C. virtutibus, and the Hist. Cuthberti; Wulstan is compiled lrom
the lise by Will. Malm.‚ its abridgement in Harl. 322, Will Malm. Gesta
Pont, Flor. Wig, Ailred’s Vita Edwardi, and the lib. miraculorum in
MS. Dunelm. B. iv. Patrick is supplemented ‘er libris monasterii apud
Glastoniam,’ sc. t'rom William of lllalm. De Antiq. Glast, and Joh. Glast.
Chronica John ot Tynemouth likes to give documents: in Thomas
Beket he finally adds the Statutes ol ctarendon (om. in Ed), asin
Augustin he laithlully records the Quaestioues and Responsiones ex·
changed between him and Pope Gregory. He even adds genealogies in .
Margaret and Oswin. Everything is water to his mill, aud he affeets
with like tendemess spurious and genuine elements3 so in cuthbert,
Edmund Κ., and Tho. Beket he gives the sabulous libelli de ortu mirabili.
ln Ositha and Edburg he has conlounded two different Saints. lle shows
his hand in the accumulation oi matter: but he rarely adds ot his own ¹.

At that time no book swas deemed complete, or perfect, without its
share oi Narrations. ΤΙιεγ were the crnze nithe age. They appeared
not only in separate collectionst, but as by-works in books ol nearly every
description. They ruled the sermon, and both the English Evangelia
Dominicalia,·and the Latin sermons oi Waldeby, are replete with them;
in the tormer, they iorm the third part os the sermon, aster the gospel
story and the Exposition. The eustom seems to have sprung up with
the hegging F riars, and their popular oratory; in their pulpit addresses
they liked to amuse the multitude with stories and buffooneries. To
humour this taste Johri ol Tynemouth introduced his Narrationes, which

ν accompany most ol his lives— generally one or two, sometimes even more
(Kentigerm punitate, Edward C. have 3, Dunstan, timebat, Willibrord
4). They have generally qply a loose-it' any—connexion with the lile,
at most as ‘ Incidents’ of the same time—und so, incidentia, they arc sre-
quentlytitled, while others have the heading Narratio, sometimes with the
qualificatlon ‘ edificatoria: Accordingly, they often begin, ‘lllis diebus,’
‘lllis etiam diebus‚¹ ‘Eo tempore: ‘Circa hec tempora,' ‘Circa hos dies,’
or, eg, ‘Circa infantiam S. Kentigerni.¹ But the Narrationes, properly so

¹ In Riehnrd und Thomas Herelordie occurs the samesenteuce in the same words.
Columba concludes with a sentence oi his own l‘ Est autern selendum quod Hibernia
proprie Scotorum est patrio: antiquitus igitur Scotia pro Hibernia sepius seribl
solet: δια), Occasional remarks about his authorities, travels, &e ure, oi course,
elso his own, ² Cf. Crane, The exemplo oi Juc. de Vitry, 1890.

 

