x , unua tuumne enutio.

task was in the air. Since Bede (in his Martyrology) had first com·
menced to add details to the lists of Saints¹ names in the older Calendars
or-Martyrologies‚ the process of filling out these details had continued in
ever-widening lines, until, after the palmy days of hagiography in the
twelith and thirteenth centones, when nearly every Saint received his
Vita, it had become possible to expand the Martyrology into a complete
Legendary, by extracts from these lives. These Legendaries were used ior
the lessons in the N octurns, and sor sermons (which on Saints’ days osten
consisted in the reading of melite), and were abridged in the Breviaries¹.
The most perfect example is the famous Legenda Aurea, the Golden
Legend (so called forits excellence) by Jacobus devoragine, Archbishop oi
Genoa 1292-8. These collections comprised the generally acknowledged
Saints of the whole Catholic Church. But in England, where the national
idea has always been prominent as against the ‘foreignen’ and was then
intensified by the Erench wars, the idea sprang up of forming a legendary
of exclusively English Saints—though the Saints themselves would have
objected to being so ‘nationalized’ the idea of saintship—the imitation oi
the Son of Man-being incompatible with national exclusiveness. This
idea arose in John of Tynemouth, and in executing it he created a truly
national work, which deserves to rank among the treasures of England.
So] having traversed (like Goscelin in the eleventh century) all England
in search of materials-cxcerpting the Vitae, Translationes, and Miracula
dispersed in the various monasteries and cathedrals, and gathering what-
ever information he could lind—he composed lu's lives from the Vitae, dcc„
so obtained, or-where a life was not extant-from the Histories and

now at Cambr. Addit. 3041, which from an inlaid letter Ι was able (in1892),with
the kind help of the Librarian‚ Mr. Jenkinson, to make ont as a work os Nic. Ros·
carrock (1549 l-1634 i), wr. c. idos-1617, and which was first in the possession os
Lord Wiil. Howard os Nawortlr. This manuscript collection is very valuabie, con·
taining as it does a great deal of new information on the Saints oi Wales, Cornwah,
Devonshire, &e 1 recommcnd it to the workers in this department. 1 find in it
that the author of the ‘English Female Saints’ (ed. ior the EE. its.) is Roh.
(al. Ralpnt Buckland (1564-1611).-Oi printed works I mention: J. W. (ie. John
Wilson): The English Martyrologe‚ eonteyning a Summary os the lives oi the
glorions and renowned Saintes of the three Kyngdomes England, Scodnnd, nnd
boland, collected and distributed into Moneths alter the form ol the Cakndnr,
according to every Saintes festivity. By a Catholiek Priest, Anno 1608 (at the
end of the Prologue the author signs 1. W. Priest) ; second ed. 1627.

The Elowers oi the Lives of the most renowned Saints os tire three Kingdoms
England, Scotland, and Ireland, written and collected out of the hest authorities
and manuscripts oi our natium and distributed according to their feasts in the
Calendar, by the R. Father Hierome Porter‚ Priest und Menke oi the Holy Order
of Sanct Benediet ol the Congregation oi England. The first Teme, printed at
Doway with lieenee and approbation of the ordinary, nr. nc. xxxrr.

Britannia Sancta, or the Lives oi the most Celebrated British, English, Seottish,
and Irish saints, who have flourished in these Islands, from the Earliest Times of
Christianity, down to the Change of Religion in the Sixteenth Centnry, Faithsully
collected from their ancient Acts and other Records of British History. 2 Pnrts.
London, Printed for Thomas Meighan, in Drnry Lane, MDCCXLV (by R. Chulloner).
(Rich. Whytford, TheMartiloge in Englysshe, ed. by W. de Worde,1526, is a
general martyrology, bnt includes the English Saints.)

¹ Cf. Altengl. Legenden, Neue Folge, 1881, p. xxxii. if.

 

