anuoburtion. 11

MCCCXLVIH fuit magna pluviae inundatio quae duravit a festo nativ.
S. loh. bapt. usque ad sequens natale Domini,¹ δια), whereas John of
Tynemouth after the date continues with ‘Hoc anno,y dac, and differs
in other respects-as in the use of Higden’s later editions—from John of
Tynemonth, who, therefore, cannot be its author. lt must be ascribed to
an anonymous monle of St. Albane.

Both John of Tynemouth’s own work aud that of his continuator are
extremely valuable as being contemporary history, and among the chief
original sources for the reign of Edward 111.

John of Tynemouth, then, was indubitably connected with st. Albans,
and this is the reason indicated above which decides the point. Nay,
more: his history is conspicuous for the great number of original
documents—letters to and from the Pope, the King of France‚ the
Archbishop of Canterbury‚ &ce—taken no doubt from the archives as
deposited at St. Albans. Such documents would be accessible only to
a man of official character, and so we may conclude that our author was
historiographus, perhaps historiographer royal (as Rishanger).

Now, if he was a monk of St. Albans, it is little lilrely that he should
have gone there in his after life; it is far more probable that he did so
in his prime of life, when his tasle was still before him. We have seen
that in 1325 another name occurs as vicar of Tyncmouth-at which time
he would be about thirty-five. We may readily believe that he then had
ceased to be vicar because he had gone to St. Albans. He would then
be just in time to talre up the work of Trokelowe and Blancford, and
succeed to the office of scriptorarius. He may even have been called to
st. Albans to fill that post at its vacancy.

Here he would continue his studies, mature the plan of his works, and
prepare the materials. He would be buried in the seclusion of the
Scriptorium‚ and diligently search its volumes.

But the taslrs he had set to himself-a history of the w‘orld, a Legendary
of all the Saints of England, &c—were so immense that even the rich
treasures of this great library would not suffice, especially for his Sancti-
logium. Even if it possessed all the works of Goscelin, Osbem, Eadmer,
Will. of lllalmesbury, Matthew Paris, the materials would by uo means
be complete. So his next years were given to travelling to supplement
his materials and fill up the deficiencies. We leam from himself that he
was at Ely¹, eanterbury²,1.0nd0n (see Botulph), Glastonbury³, Here·

¹ ‘Ip monasterio heliensi scripturn inveni,' &c.,-St. Alban, p. 36, Edw. m. 350.

² Mrldred, p. 197: ‘Invenio enirn scriptum in cenobio S. Gregorii cantuarie,
qnod uarro domini 1085 Lanfraucus archiep. corpora SS. virginum hlildrede et
ladburge, iu Tharretoinsula sepulta, de terra levavit, et in ecclesia b. Gregorii
Qantuarre quam ad pauperum solamen paulo ante (le rebus ecclesie cui presidebat
ditauerat, cum magno honore transferens collocavit. tbi reuera sen'nium sutis
preciosum aduentantibus ostenditur; sed et altercationem inter monachos et
canonicos pro corpore S. Mildrede, nondum tempore nostro sedatam, peritioribus
discutiendum relinquo, qui quod in utroque loco scriptum repperi, ad futurorum
noticiam peruenire volui '; similarly Edburg, p. 310.

³ Patrio, p. 289: ‘Que autern inferius digesta sunt, apud Glastoniam ex libris
monasterus illius excerpsi, que si veritatem sapiant lectoris arbitrio relinquo.¹

 

