1 wana herenna euntia

aud lar continuantia C. C. C. C. 6 is tlte hrain source osbati tlte Chronica:
Augeae ab. 1328-88 (ed. Thorapson) aad Tho. Walsirgshamsor1343-77.
He is the source ol Knighton. His own contemporary history begins
where Henry de Blancsord probably ended, and where Higdeu's first
edition (of 1327) ended, with whose last sentence he starts, proceeding
thenceforth independently—the coronation of Edward ΙΙΙ (it begins:
‘Edwardus igitur post Conquaestum 31¹³, annos 14 in festo S. Bricii ante
coronationem suam iam hahens, in vigilia Purificationis b. Mariae apud
Westmonasten'um solempniter coronatur ¹). It ends, sornewhat abruptly,
in Lib. 21, Cap. 81, with the capture of Charles oi Blois, June 20, 1347,
the dispersa: of French victualling vessels attempting to enter Calais,
June 2 5, and a letter (found on shore) describing the ‘desectum et miseriam
obsessorum¹ in Calais (the French text of which letter is given by Rob. of
Avesbury); without relating the further events leading to the capture of
Calais, as given by Robert of Aveshury under these heads: ‘ De adventu
regis Franciae’ (July 27) ‘et eius fuga' (Aug. 2) with a letter in French of
the king to the archbp. on these events (nug. 3), ‘Captio de Caleys'
(nug. 3] ², ‘Tenor treugarum' (Sept. 25) with the Articuli et capitula in
French. Why he stops short in the midst ol these events does not
appear. ln the style of this history we easily recognize the author of
the Sanctilogiumssthe same vicinus use of ‘enirm' the same love of the
marvellous as expressed in ‘ legends' of apparitions, visions, dte, inserted
in his history ².

The continuation in MS. C. C. C. C. 6 (no other MS. is known to exist)
starts hackwards with 1343—the mission of Henry oi Lancaster and
other convoys to Rome to treat of Edward’s right to the French crown,
beginning: ‘Sub eodem tempore missi sunt in parte Regis Anglorum
procuratores ad curiam Romanam Dominus Henricus de Lancastria,
Comes de Derby, Hugo le Spencer, Radulphus de Stailord,' &o (Chrou.
Angliae, p. 153 Hist. Anglic. p. 261). It ends with the close of
Edward Ill’s reign, 1377. It has a somewhat different arrangement,
always beginning with ‘Anno gratiae‚’ &c., followed immediately by
the text and affecting the construction (lor instance, ‘Anno gratiae

larorvever,tabridge sometvhat John os Tynemouth’s text, omitting several os the
onumen s.

1 The Lamheth MS. of the Ηίεϊ.Ι aurea, indeed, ends with a short notice os the
calingae iiisiliaelalii'giiruntnilgffiois{drigiii'tsmileifgrgilhiiifilitetzs a vision, beginning: ‘Hoc
eodem ternpore snit in Westmerlandia senex quidam venerabilis, ab Edwardo
Primo, cui in adolescentia servierat sufficienter ditatus... Nocte vero quadam,
dum membra sopori dedisset, usque ad plana sarisburiae perlonga terrarum spatia
subito se translatum videbat, et ecce a septentrione exercitus maguus et terribilis
cum equis et armis pice nigrioribus apparebat, quem nudus qnidam antecedens
crucem in humeris baiulavit, &a (the vision is an nnticipation ot the war with the
Scots). ns he gives only a vagne date, he nray possibly have heard the story
while yet at Tynemonth. Another legend (‘de muliere ab incubo cognita, in
parochia de Kyngesley, Winton.') is given in 1337: Tho. Walsingham here gives
three stories ot the same neighbourhood. 1111338 it is mentioned that ‘invilla
de Leghton iuxta Hnntindon natus est vitulus a habens cupita et 8 pedeS,' &e

 

