lviii mtto: teneam flantia

note), or all in one strain,but was successively added'to as new materials
turned up or were deemed worthy ot admission, especially such as were

Ἰ connected with Bury St. Edmunds. Itis the depository ofdocuments of
that abbey‚ and not the work of one individual, hut the joint work, the
common concern oi the monastery for a whole generatim. The Hist.
aurea fills only the first part oi the MS, to p. 5823 the latter, which,
however, follows immediately upon the former without any break, is
a collection of miscellanies ol various kinds, lives of saints, documents oi
all sorts, poetry‚ &e The first leaf contains a short ‘Medicina spiritualis
pro dolore dentium,’ and Orationes; the Hist. aurea is preceded by an
index, beg. ‘ Aaron rex missis muneribus amicitiam Karoli meruit, Ahendon
monasterinm a Cisso rege constructum est li. 17 cap. 167, Abbas Matheus
in ordine predicator iactus est ti, 20' c. 45, &c’ The text of the Hist.
aurea is headed: ‘Incipit pars secunda Historia auree abbreviate
Iohannis Anglici. 9. De rnorte Arrii et de Athanasio, Cap. primum?
The text begins: ‘Romanorum igitur 35. regnauit Constantinus, Con-
stantius quoque et Constans annis243 Ceperunt autem regnare ab. 340?
On the margin is written: ‘ 14. (liber),’ ancl by a later handt ‘Abbreviatio
Historiae Aureae Ioannis de Tynmouth.'

The MS, therefore, contains only the second part of the Hist. aurea,
and with an abbreviated text. A first volume is not known, and perhaps
never existed‘¹

The Historia concludes, in lib. 21,with the capture of Charles de Blois,
cap. 80, and the dispersa] of the French ships before Calais, together with
a letter describing the sufferings os the besieged, cap. 81 ². At the bottom
is the note: ‘Explicit Historia aurea loh. Anglici 3¹ a later hand adds:
‘vel potius Guidonis Dionisiani abbatis Gallici.'

of the valuable eontents that now follow immediately in the same hand
(with the chapters and books of the Hist. aurea carried on), and which
are partly taken from other works oi John of Tynemouth-l here give
a list. The last page of the Hist. aurea continues with-

De fortuna Angla, a poem on events of 1369, beg.
‘An Do. Mil. ter C. sex. no. sunt ista reperta:
Classes diuerse tendunt ud prelia certa) dcc, and
(Cap. 82) ‘Conclusio mortis pro omni genere hominnm dicens Vado mori,’ another
poem, bag. ‘Gloria mundana sic est, sic ornnia vana3' imperfect, as

sevdfflfl leaves are missing. The next leaf, i. 292, begins at the
eil Ο 8,

¹See note 1, p. lv.

' It begins: ‘Eodem anno nunciatum est magnatibus Anglorurn‚ in obsidione
Calesii existentium, de Gallico nauigio iuxta Boioniarn congregato. Unde et
7 Kal. Iulii Comes de Norhampton dominus de Morbo, et dominns Waldus de
Manney cum ceteris nobilibus, armatis et sagittariis in multitudine magna naues
intrantes erectisque velis prospero cursu non multum a Boionia Gallicorum nauibus
et galeis obuiarunt,' &c The letter concludes: ‘Dominus noster lesus Christus
vitam prosperam et longam vobis donare dignetur, et si provehis nos mori con-
tingat, heredibus nostris secundum merita nostra vobis voluntatem retribuendi
largiatur¹ (ef. Rob. de Avesbury, p. 385). “

 

