anennoeton. ¹ xxx

place itseli, which rises almost perpendicular above the waves, the sea
with its calms and storms and ships ¹, and, more than this, the grand
memories oi the past which lingered in the neighbourhood, must alt have
tended to rouse the lostier instincts oi his mind and to impress it with
feelings os reverence. The new enthusiasm which blazed up in the
North also exercisecl its influence. l-lere he would perform the duties oi
his office as parish priest, but in his leisurc hours revert to his studies in

² the library oi the monastery, bending over the goodly tomes which told
oi a great past. The works of Bede, whose monastery had stood on the
other side oi the Tyne’s mouth, would naturally rivet his attention3 he
would also admire the subsequent historiens, especially the luminaries oi
St. Amans, Matthew Paris ¹, &c John de Trokelowe may have had
personat influente on him. ln this school hisv mind would receive its
direction. Inspired by the example of Bede he would conceive the idea
oi continuing his work. His mind was an antiquary's like Bede, and
equally comprehensive. All his works are conceived on a vast plan-
universal history, universal hagiology. He would not dwell on details, or
linger in the way, but hurried on to comprehend the whole, and get round
a subject—a saxon trait. He always goes in sor the whole, epitomizing,
abridging the details. Not productive, like Rode, he was satisfied with
collecting and compiling.

It is very likely that he conceived the plan oi his great work at Tyne-
mouth, and laid the tirst foundation there. But he would soon find his
limitation. The library oi the convent, however well supplied, would
hardly suffice ior his ambitious pursuits. llis duties as vicar would
hardly allow him leisure enough, or permit his travelling about to collect
the materiale. So the statement that he was aitenvards monlr oi
St. Albans seems plausible at first sight. He would naturally look to the
larger monastery, with its great librury and its accommodatiori, as the
litter place ior his task; or his superiors, aware os his pursuits, would
procure his calli.

But, strange to say, no. direct testimony can he adducediorhis residente
there. In the Annals oi St. Albans he is conspicuous by his absence, tris
name a complete blank, as irhe had never been. He neither occurs in
the list os eminent men and writers oi St. Albans in MS. Claudius E. iv⁴

the common people are standing arouud aud making merry (Riley‚ Annales Joh.
Amundcsham, p. xxxv).

ι .. ..
² lllhdvilidsliidl⁶alo excerpt ol his Chronicle, extending srom 1066 to 1245, sor
ἷξε linteolis oi Tynemouth3 it is now lllS. Vitellius Α. xx ς ci. hardy, neser. Cot,
³ It must also be considered that, among the places which he visited to collect
{hg tiliieelmls oi his works, he never mentions St. Albana-simply because it was
h ⁴ This list, written atlthe end oi' Thomas de la Mure's abbacy (by Tho Walsiug·
ami), gives the following account oi the writers: ‘Consequenter in nostro mona-
sterio floruit Rogerus tie Wendouere, noster monachus, cui paene dehent totius
regar chronographi quidquid habent. Nam plane et perlucide ab initio mundi per

da

 

