· 534 . aaronis 1·

by God himself in Paradize; and such as vsed it, wele might purchase

heaven and be saved; And therefore wished her not to break that
promiss which she had made in her Mariage. To which she replied:
lf promisses were to be kept, then cheiflie that which shee had formerlie
5made vnto God in vowing virginitie. ‘lf yow haue done soe, said the
Cannam I dare proceede noe further, but referr it to the Bishop' Whose
opinion being asked, answered first directlie, that nether hee, nor anie
other, coulde dispence with her to personne the part of a wife, shee being
vnwilling. With which answere Berffred at first seamed satisfied, and
ro offred to give her somwhat to enter into Religion. But his frindes quicklie
altered his minde, perswading him that the Bishop, being a man not verie
scrupilous, and a lover of money, woulde be therby sone brought about to
give a contrarie sentence ς as it seames he did, for meanes being made to
him, he sent for her, and demaunded of her whie shee refused to performe
15 the part of a wife. She answered, her vowe- ‘Whie,' quoth the Bishop,
‘woulde yow not, if yow might, marrie the kings sonn, notwithstanding that
vowe?’ ‘Noe, in truth,’ quoth shee.. ‘Will yow referr the Matter to
mee?' quoth the Bishop. ‘To whom but to God and yow should l referr
it 2¹ quoth shee. The Bishop ¹taking advantage of these wordes, gave
20 sentence against her; and not long after, dyed. Berffred vppon the
Bishops answere urged her afreshe; but shee, refusing, ashed what he
would doe, if anne woulde perforce attempt to take her from him.
‘Marna quoth hee, hill him if I coulde) ‘Well, quoth shee, howe dare
yow taire mee from Christe, whoe can, if he will, kill yow.' Her
2 5 Parentes, seing her husband Could noe waye prevaile with her, foke her
hoome, to trye what they coulde doe with her; and her Father delt so
vnlrindelie and barbarouslye with her, as when she had answered him
that she woulde not break her vowe vnto God, he turned her in a rage
out of Duores in the night time, having nothing on but her smock3
30 sayeing, that if shee woulde needs goe vnto God, she shoulde goe as
naked to him as she Came from him. Her mother, to inforce her, did soe
cruellie beat her, as the Markes of her stn'pes were tobe seene on her
whilst she lived. l The poore gentlewoman hardlie Censured hythe
Bishopp, soe ill vsed by her parents, soe urged by her husband, and that
35 which greived her moste of all, abandoned of her Ghostlie Father, who
thought shee had Consented more to her husband then shee did, was not
a little perplexed3 at which time it pleased Christe himself to appeare
vnto her, with a glorious Crowne; so Comforting her, as shee thervpon
Chaunged her name from Theodora to Christiana. After this Comfort the
40 Ghostlie adversarie did not cease to incumber her with straunge illusions,
terrifieing her somtimes in the forme of a wilde Bull offering to toss her
on his homes, somtimes like vglie Toads, and another time in the
deformed shape of a Man without a head; and alsoe in stirring vpp and
exasperating hir parentes against her, whoe made a Gayle of there howse
45 to restraine her from her owne frindes, because she woulde not give waie
to there wills to satisfye Berffreds importunitie with the wounding of her
Conscience. ln such sort as she had noe means to free herself but by

 

