lxvi . mona termus anyti.

express himself from vvant ol practice. Such a man must sorcibly abstract
himself from his old occupation and give himself rest for years-and then
spontaneity of style may revive, and he may yet develop intoan able
writer.

Of this description was John of Tynemouth. He is a good compiler,
but a bad writer. Used to excerphng, he is shy of expressing himself,
of composing, forming, styling. He rarely speaks—even his Historia
, , aurea is mostly excerpt, and when he has to speak, as in chronicling his
oum time, he writes with difficulty, in lewest words, and likes to give
documents which exempl him from speaking for himself. But he possesses
all the best qualities of a compiler. l-lis force is memory, knowledge of
facts, dates, names. His retentive faculty was immense, to judge from
the vast amount of materials he had at command, His mind is compre-
hensive, capacious, not penetrating. His is the spirit of the antiquary,
the student ol history, documents, relies, &c.-an historiari not as our
time understands the term, but as his time understood it—a chronicler
or annalist in an epic sense, a recorder of facts and dates, put loosely
together according as his rendering or information provided the materials.
He naturally takes to excerpting as the means of collecting facts. But,
though an omnivorous reader, he was not one of whom it can be said:
‘He reads too much, such men are (tangemus) He is no revolutionary,
no sceptic, no cynic. He euercises no criticism, no judgement. liis
credulity is unbounded. He takes in everything, believes in everything,
even the most stupendous and ‘creepy’ stories. He has even a ‘penchant'
for the gruesome kind of narrative, and has carefully collected, and
distributed amongst his works, all the tales oi apparitions, visions,
portents, omens, &c., he could lay hold on. In everything he sees the
divine influeme, andis a perfect believer in God's words and works.
But neither is he an enthusiast: he is always the same cool, collected,
plain, matter-ol-fact man, of sound common-sense, except in his
credulity. As he likes instruction so he wants to instruet, and is pleased
to point morals. His narrations give many sayings of philosophus,
exampleS, &c., from the Vitas Patrum, Gregory's Dialogues, &a

The Catholic world has always produced two types of humanity: the
lean, fervid ascetic, and the comfortable, round, quiet, practical, studious
monk-both good in their way, and corresponding to the types of genius
and talent, progressive or stationary disposition. The former has produced
great lyric poets‚ orators, reformers, legislatore, like St. Bernard‚ Francis,
Rich. Roller the latter great collectors, historiens, like Bede and
Matthew Paris, John of Tynemouth belongs to the latter class. lle
cannot claim the title of genius, but he has (lone some very uselul work,
which should secure to him the gratitude of the nation. Yet, like so

many others, his name has been torgotten, and a usurper has taken
his crown.

lt is hardly fair to name Capgrave with our Collection, his share being,
at most, restricted to the change of the on'ginal arrangement-and yet it

 

