xxx milit 111ssssde attulit.

“ dates'from' the Nonnan Conquest with its influx of French learning,

heralded by Abho of Fleury (V. Edmundi, wr. ah. 985) and Folcard of
st. Bertin, afterwards of Thorney. He knows nearly all the great writers
of the twelfth' and thirteenth centuries—Goscelinus (who accompanied
Hermann-afterwards bp. os Salisbury—from St, Bertin to England, and
was successively rno'nk of Ely, Ramsey, and St. Austin's, Canterbury,
where he died ab. 1098), the biographer of the early Saron Saints;
Osbern of Canterhury, the friend of Lanfranc (V. Dunstani, Elphegi, &eh
Eadmer of Canterbury (d. 1124), the friend of Anselm and historiari of
the later archbishop53 Osbert de Clare (c.1140? prior of Westnrinster);
Willianr of Malmesbury (dc. 1142) who wrote lives of the Saints of his
monastery; Giraldus Camhrensis (trudi-moi, author ofthe V. Caradocii);
Ailred of Rievaux (V. Edwardi c., &c.); Petrus 'Blesensis (dc. 1212,
V. Guthlaci); Reginald of Durhem (V. Godrici, Ebbe, Cuthberti), &o

Where a life did not exist, he had to compile his materials from other
lives, or from the Histories and Chronicles of Englund-ehief of which
is Bede's, from whence he makes extracts in the case of Edwin, Aidan,
Cedda, Cerid, Hilda, Egbert, the Hewalds, heuses him hy preference even
where a life did exist, as in Augustin, Paulin, Oswald n, John of Beverley‚
or with the life, as in Wilsrid. Ethelbert and Lethard are made out ol
Goecelin’s V. Augustini3 Amphibalus froin V. Albani; Hugo puer is
extracted from Matthew Paris. For Dunstan and Tuudal even Vincentius
Bellovacensis is used3 for Richard the bull of canonization (1262).

In a few cases he had himself to compile his life from a few meagre
notices in the historiens, asin Kynehurg and Kyneswide, Hildelitha,
Edhurga (rvhom he confounds with Ethelburga), Felix, Brithun.

ln many cases the primitive life has perished‚ and our Collection thus
itself becomes the prime source, as in Caradoc, Clarus, Finan, Henry,
lustinan, luthwara, lwius, Kened, Keyna, Melorus, Maxentia, Osmanna,
Peroe, Wlfhilda, to which the Ed. adds Bertellin, Cungur, Decuman,
Edgar, John of Bridlington, Walstan,Willianr of Perth; or the primitive
life is only known in other ahridgements, as in Elfleda, Robert, Milburg,
wulstn. Or additions are given from unknown sources, as in Laurentius,
Paulin. This great number of Saints’ lives otherwise unknown renders
the Collection so highly valuahle‚ though in these cases it is often difficult
to rernedy the text.

The primitive sources are often supplemented by other more recent
records, and the biography ol the Saints is continued to its end. The lives
are often mosaics of the most varied rnaterials3 compounds of many
ingrediente. The life is followed hythe Translatio and ldiracula, often
written hy different or various authors; additions are given from other
lives (as in Anselnr from Milo's V. Lanfranci, Erkenwuld fronr V. Ethel-
hurgae; in Cuthbert from Reginald, Dunstan from Eadrner), the history
is conrpleted from the Chronicles and Histories (under the quotation
‘ut in historiis legitur ¹), as Bede, William of Mahneshury (for Patrick)‚
Florence Wigorn. (forWulstan), Simeon Dunelnr. (for Cuthhertl, lVlatthew
Paris (for Amphibalus), Historia Ellensis, Higden (for Dunstan, Edruund

 

