annonantur. tv

MS. Tib, we find them nearly the earne, perhaps a little more abridged
in the former. The last two are not found in the Sanctilogium.

So the Sanctilogium and the Historia aurea are the only works os John
οἱ Tynemouth known to exist ¹. Os the Sanctilogium l have already said
all that ean be said. The Historia aurea has never yet been eramined.

The Historia aurea (so-called in imitation of the Legenda aurea by
lacobus a Voragine) or Liber Chronicorum, is extant in three sets of
MSS, all large tolio volumes with double columns.

1. MSS. Lambeth‚ 10-12, late fourteenth century, titled (by a later hand)
‘Iohannis de Tinmouth (vel, ut in quibusdam exemplaribus, Iohannis>
peccatoris, Eborum dioceseos) Historia aurea siue Liber chronicorum
ab initio mundi ad a. 1347 quo Franci urbem Calesie Regi Angliae
reddiderant.¹ MS. 10, Pn‘ma pars Historiae aureae, contains in 302 fol.
the first ten books, from the beginning nithe world down to Nero; lol. 48
is wanting. MS. 11, Secunda pars Hist. aureae, gives in 292 t'ol. boolrs
11-18, to nt). 605 (beginning ‘Vespasianus igitur post mortem Galbae,
Othonis et Vitellii regno potitus est ¹) ; some leaves at the end are missing.
MS. 12, Tertia pars H. A, has in 255 fol. books 19-23; the 19 comprising
the years 602—670 (beginning ‘Postquam Mauricius milites suos non
prohiberet a rapinis, iussu Foce unacum uxore et filiis quinque interfectus
est¹); ao, 670—8003 ar, 800-1060; aa, 1060-1273; 23, 1273-1347. The
last chapter treats De captione Caroli de Blois3 hut at the end a short
notice is added, announcing the capture of Calais (¹ Eodem anno post
annalem fere obsidionem, lamis coacti molestia, saluis vita et membris,
qui intus erant regi Anglie urbem Calesii reddiderunt'; rest of the page
leit vacant), which notice is a later addition from Higden. The Hist.
aurea is followed, s. 248-54, by a ‘Legenda quorundam sanctorum cum
aliis quibusdam notabilibus¹ (so title hy a later hand), comprising lives oi-

S. Etheldreda,

„ Sexburga,

,‚ Werburga,

„ David Menevensis,
„ Panic,

„ Bregwinus,

the texts ot which, with slight variations, are those given in the Sancti-

'iginii'slffl' Bregwin has been ed. in Wharton, Anglia Sacra, {rom
t ls .

¹ Newcome, Hist. of St. Albans, p. 401, ascribes to John ot* T. also a lise os
St. Alban, ‘bnt I believe it has perished? In MS. C. C.C. Ο. 154, the Vita Oswinl
rs ascribed to him (‘ Iohannis de Tinmonth, Sancti Regis et martyris Oswini vita,
cum officio pro eius festo ’). Joscelin, Catal. Hist. (in llearne, Rob. ol Avesbnry),
adds another work: ‘Scripsit etiam Excerptiones aureae historiae, quae sie
incipiunt: In principio creavit deus celum et terratia. Habet Mt. Ioannes Bake,
irater Archiepiseopi Cant!

² At the end, s. 254, follow, by another hand, two prophecies oi Tho. Beket
(¹ de Ampulla; de Lilio et Leone et Filio hominis’), written ln 1407 'de nnn
cedula valde vetusta,' and signed ‘quod Fishboume' (name of the scribe); then,
‘Causae eur Seoti Antipnpe (cardinali Gebenensi) adheserunt eontra papam

 

