xxxvia wana teutone unaue.

of Jarrow (founded by Benedict in 682, with its sister monastery of Wear-
mouth, founded 674), made famous by Bede; at some distance to the
north was the lsle of Coquet (sometime apossession of the priory, later on
of St.Albans),so famous forhermits in Cuthbert’s time. The priory was Α
= founded in 625 by K. Edwin, was repeatedly destroyed by the Danes, and

’ , as often restored by distinguished persons ; was foratirne given to Jarrow

(by Waltheof, Earl of Northumberland‚ c. 1074) and, with Jarrow, annexed
to the church of St. Cuthbert (1085); but was refounded as a Black
priory subordinate to the Normun abbey of St. Albane, in 1090, by
Earl Robert de hlowbray, who rebuilt the place and fortified it. From
this time it remained a cell of St. Albane, till its dissolution on Jan. 12,
1539, when Robert Blakeney, the last prior, with fifteen monks and three
novices signed the deed of surrender [which deed is preserved among
the records of the former Court of Augmentations at Carlton Ride,
London). In 1121 the monks of Durham endeavoured to recover the
church, by virtue ol the gift of Waltheof‚ and urged that claim in
a chapter at York, but in vain3 they renewed their claim from time to
time, until it was compromised in 1134, with the sanction of Pope
Alexander ΙΙΙ. In Abbat Richard d’Albiney’s time (d. 1129) an arrange·
ment was rnade between the priory and the parent-abbey of St. Albane,
whereby the church of Tynemouth was to pay to the abbey 305. yearly,
andro relinquish to the abbats the churches of Bywell and Woodburn,
the tithes of Amble, and the lsle of Coquet3 and it was provided that
when the abbat made a visit to Tynemouth, he with twenty attendants
should be entertained for fifteen days by that fratemity (Gibson, p. 42).
The patron Saint was St. Oswin, King of Deire-of the illustrious
lineage of Edwin‚ the first founder-who joined the army of martyrs in
651, and was interred ‘in the oratory of the Blessed Virgin at Tynemouth'

sending, as the name implies, was appropriated to the accommodatior} pf the
llllltllltlttlttblf ilrielll‘lle leltllzethlltlillllltsstltltltlglll
ip nrpyrlrerp¹ upon thplplanc.l bhypahr to thisobuflrding’ trypd Wilgin tfhphinner'lecyprtfi weple
{nl tilatlltllrdh all illelmi rlrlallgflla? tte sitting&
which, wilh the “ Corn-house,” appears to have formed the eastern bonndary of the
great court Its western side was occupied by “the Conslable¹s Lodging” end
the ¹¹ Kylne.'‘ A long row of stables, which, if the proportions of the plan can be
trusted, were nearly ns long as the church, inclosed, on the eastern side, o triangular
space called the “Poultry-yard’¹ ς and eastward of the stanles stood u very large
building marked as ‘⁴ thegreat barn,¹' a lesser building called a barn, and another
called the granary, which, with the stables, inclosed o space called the barn-ynrd.
The space between these buildings and the edge of the elin, which at that time
probably extended much further into the sea than it does at present, formed the
“North-Wallr.'’ A large quadrangular space eastward of the abbey church is
represented as vacant, and is called the “Garden Place,'' and its southern boundary
“hildebrant {lllllltilltttttlltltltirht‘tttbbtllhl
dllff which ovperloolrspthe Prior’s Haderl), gorresponds to the sloping groundlcovered
with grass, between the two eristing walls, and is marked as the ‘¹ South eonrt.''
Adjoining the ditch, to the south-west of the town of Τ., the place of “theold Fish
ponde, now an old dyke,’' is represented on the plan' ffiibson).

 

