’ Ῑὶηῐῖΰῧῑῐίῒίῦη. 'xvii

quedam de istis etiarn reperiuntur apud plures, non tamen ita emendate
et correcte sicut in hoc volumen continentur1’-

in which note the title, as well as the last remark about the neuness of
these historias, seenrs passing strange to us who know the history of the
Collection, and seems to prove that the editor knew neither John of
Tynenrouth’s nor Capgrave's name. Of this edition three copies are
still extant in Oxford, three in Cambridge, two in London, one (C 48, h 2)
imperfect, wanting ff. 283-91, the other (G 11925) complete. It has no
title-page3 the first leaf bears the same woodcut (the Trinity surrounded
by Saints) on both sides, which is again repeated 011 the recto of the
last leaf, the verso hearing Caxtnn's device.

The Ed. adds a Protogue‚ and the following new lives :- .

Str Benediet². St. Iohannes de Bridlingtou.
St. Berteliin. St. Ioseph ab Arimathiu.
St. Cungar. St. Kiliuu.
St. Decumuu. St. Osmund.
St. Edgur (text transp. to the end of St. Wnlstan.

the Ed.³). St. Wyro.
St. Helena St. William, mart. Roffensis.

besides new lives for St. Richard and St. Ursule, in the place of the older
texts of MS. Tib.

Of these new lives, those of Cungar and Decuman are late works ot the
fourteenth century, as is proved by the alliteration. John of Bridlingtou
died 1379, Oct. 10, and was translated in 1404 (cf. Walsinghain).
Osmund was canonized 1111456 by Calixtus lli, translated in 14573 his
feast was celebrated on Dec. 4 with an office of nine lessons, through the
whole province of Canterbury, and his translation on July 16 with an
Octave, in the diocese of Sarum, his life in the Ed. merely reproduces
the lessons of the Officium as extant in the Sarum Breviary and corn-
posed for the translation iu 1457. The new lives had not been added in
1499, when MS. Tanner was written. lt is evident, therefore, that these
lives cannot have been introduced by Capgrave: both they and the Pro·
logne (which is not found in any of the MSS. mentionedl⁴ must be later
additions, made-by an anonymous author-to a new issue of Capgrave’s

¹ These words are on u par with the arrogance dispiuycd in the Prologue where
the writer calls himself the ‘collector sive ut ita dicum auctor operis,’ who ‘ suum
compilandis Sanctorum vitis dedit operam, ut et ipse tam pii operis fructum
percipiat. et aliis quoqne ad eorum meritum plura aliaque ud hee addendi
facultatem relinquat' (p. 9). It seems, therefore, that both the uote und the
Prologue belong 10 the same writer.

² liiS. Tib. had given the title of Benediet to the life of Colfrid; the Ed. now
suipihsetrheeaihunuiihy he was placed at the end is given in the life: [Via b. regis
Edgarr minime fuit inventa quousque liber iste impressus fuit ultra literam E, ita
quod in loeo suo secundum ordinem alphabeti nulio modo imponi potnit: ideo in
fine presengis libri imponitur, et in tabula seeundum ordinem alphabeti locum
suurn tene it.l

⁴ The ‘Fasciculus Temporum‘ quoted inProl.,p. 5, is axvork ofll'alterRoleviuek
(1425-1502‚ b. at Horstnrar, Westfelia3 Carthasian ut St. Clara, Cologne), und
111111ἑ“1111111111 111111ῗὲ1,11ῑὸ1’311ῗέ lathi? seii ”⁰¹¹⁰

' ι y q ι

 

