huwuouttiuu. lxvii

is his name by which the Collection uvas known iu modern times. How
he came to that honour no one knows—perhaps through a note in a MS.
of this new arrangement, though of the existing MSS. none contains it.
The testimony of the early bibliographos, who under his name give the
Vitae Sanctorum Anglorurn (Leland) or Catalogus Sanctorum Angliae
(hale, Pits), with the opening words (of the Prologus) ‘Sancti patres
qui priscis fuere,' is incouclusive, as the Prologus certainly was added, as
has been shown in the Ed. of 1516, long aster Capgrave (who died 1464).
The tradition may have started with Leland, who, not knowing John 11
Tynemouth even by name, or MS. Tib, ascribed his work to Capgrave,
the best-known name in hagiology of the preceding century. Rosearrock,
who knew MS. Tib, deems John Capgrave and ton. Anglicus to be the
same person (cf. vol. ii. p. 5 3²)· The earlierBollandists,nothaving access
to English sources, give the lives of our Collection under Capgrave's
name, not from the Ed. of which they possessed no copy, but from a MS.
Rubeae Vallis made from it. Their testimony can have no value. So

capgrave’s share in the work, within the limits indicated, remains an
open question which l have no means ol deciding. Sarius gives many
ο1 the lives oi our Collectiou in a modified form, which conceals the
provehente of his texts

Of Capgrave a few words will suffice—more information can be found

in Hingeston's editions of Capgrave's Chronicle and Liber de illustri·
bus Henricis (Rolls Series), and in the ed. of his S. Katherine (E.E.T.S.
1893).

John Capgrave was born at Lynne in Norfolk (as he states in Prol. to
St. Katherrl, April 21, 1393, entered the Order oihugustin Frinrs at
Lynne, studied either at Cambridge (Leland3 Tanner confirms this from
the Life of St. Gilbert) or at Oxford, where, as Bale states, he took his
degree of D.D.‚ or possibly at both3 was ordaiued priest in 1417 or 1418
(four or five years before the birth of Henry Vl, cf. De vir. illustr. p. 127),
and became later on Provincial of his order (as such he appears iu two
documents, d. 1456, in White Kennet‚ Paroch. Antio), and after passing
nearly all his life at Lynne (with the exception of a joumey to Rome
where he fell ill and ruas helped by Bp. Grey of Ely), died there,
August 12, 1464 (Bate). He is called by his biographers the most learned
of English Augustinians, and was indeed a scholar of some merit, a
philosopher, theologiam, and historian. His patron was Humphrey‚ Duke
of Gloucester. He wrote a great many works, many of which are lost,
ur Latin (cf. Bale): Commentarios on the Old and New Testament-of
these only those on Genesis (autogr. MS.,wr.1437-8 and dedicated to
Humphrey, is in Oriel Colli 32) and Acts (MS. Balliol 189, given by
Bp. Grey} are estant3 de Fidei Symbolis (MS. is in Balliol 190, which
gives the author's name as ‘loh. de Monumento Pileato ¹) ; Manipulus
Doctrinae Christianae ς Super Sententias P. Lomburdi; Determinatioues
Theologicae; Ad Positiones erroneas3 Orationes ad Uerum, Sermones
per annum3 Lecturue Scholasticae3 Ordinariae disputationes; Episto-
lae ad uive1s0s;ytta S. Augustini; De sequacibus Augustini, aud De

 

