APPENDIX l.

-aee-

Fnon Nic. Roscnnaocr’s Caranocoa or Enccrsn Snrnrs.

THE Collection in T. is followed, in the same hand (that oi a scribe of
St. Albans), by a long lile os St. Christina or Theodora, imperfect at the
end, which life, in the absence of another MS, it will be impossible to
decipher, the MS. having been badly damaged by fire. In Roscarrock’s
5 Lives of English Saints (MS. Brent Eley, now Camb. Addit. MSS. 3041),
however, the contents of this life are given from the very same MS. Tib.
E. 1 in its originally imperfect state. His interesting article (which also
gives important hints of the history of MS. Tib.) is as follows :—

Of Christiana otherwise called Theodora.

,ο Ι Finde in a Manuscript which was given by Thomas De la March
Abbot ol St. Albons to the Priorie oi Rudbum, and intituled Sancti·
logium Britaniae¹‚ and seameth much like, thoughe differing in sum
pointes from, Capgraue it agreing with him soe in other as ii they were
not one, yet the one of thern greatlie imitated the other, thoughe it
15appeareth not to mee which was the more auncient of them. This
Manuscript is called by som Johanis Anglicus, a name which John

Capgraue‚ an Englishman, may iustlie challendget ln the end oi this
bokeyl finde in part, the life of one Theodora or Christiana, not perfitted3
the effectos which Ι will breiflie laye downe, that others, lighting on
κο a inore exact Coppie, maie perfitt it; giving the more creaditt vnto it, sor
that a Monck of St. Albons wrote it, and that theseos Rudburne woulde
never haue tollerated it had it bene fabulous, shee being somtimes of the
one howse, and not living sarr from the other. To proceede then,
³My Author saithe one Autie. a Gentlernan of Huntington‚ Maried one

Ι ¹MS.Britania. f'This is, os course,abad mistalre; John oi Tynemonth
Is Siuli&liiiihicroli)eliiigihsr?li].(i&hiiigrreahhhctitatis et gracie actu nobiliter in ciuitate
Huntendonie. Pater eius nuni, mater vocabatur Beatrir. Ipsa uero nomen sor·
tite Theodoram in baptismate, nouissime pro Theodora nornen sibi christinam
accepit ev necessitate. Virgo sane nondum nata, iarn electa deo ac ostensa
est hominibus. Quam dnm mater sua gestaret in utero, (contigit) eandem

 

